hello and welcome
to episode 35. this is part
two of the evolution of culture which is
chapter 15 of the beginning of infinity
today i'll be going through selfish
memes
and static societies and we'll be
distinguishing between static societies
and dynamic societies
but i'll leave dynamic societies until
next episode
a crucial question we'll be considering
in this chapter is why it is that
human creativity can express itself in
such
different ways in different societies in
a sort of reliable way
so in certain kinds of societies which
we call dynamic societies
this creativity is used to cause
progress and change
but in a static society something else
is going on
we've got the same kind of creativity
but it's being used
not for progress it's being used to
maintain the status quo
i think david deutsch gives a unique
creative answer himself and this is a
question that has
civilizational consequences after all
we want to tend towards being a dynamic
society
a society that continues to solve
problems at a rapid rate
in fact we need to be able to continue
to solve problems at a rate
more rapid than the rate at which we
encounter them because eventually
the civilizational destroying problem
might arise and if we aren't able to
create knowledge in time
if we are too slow to react then that'll
be the end of us
now a static society isn't making
progress hardly at all
it's not really creating knowledge there
are very few
perfectly dynamic societies and
perfectly static societies
historically we might be able to look at
examples of near-perfect static
societies although nothing comes quite
perfect nothing is quite perfectly
static but the lesson is
that societies these days contend in one
direction or the other
and we always want to tend in the
direction of
dynamism of fast progress of being able
to change in a direction that allows us
to improve
now before we get to the main discussion
about
static societies and the causes of
static societies
we need to go back to the idea of memes
and david's up to the point where he
talks about the selfish meme
obviously a play on the selfish gene
from richard dawkins
so i'll begin reading and for anyone
following along i happen to be up to
page 377
the selfish meme if a gene is in a
genome at all
then when suitable circumstances arise
it will definitely be expressed
as an enzyme as i described in chapter 6
and will then cause its characteristic
effects
nor can it be left behind if the rest of
its genome is successfully replicated
but merely being present in a mind does
not automatically get a
meme expressed as behavior the meme has
to compete for that privilege with other
ideas
memes and non-memes about all sorts of
subjects in the same mind
and merely being expressed as behaviour
does not automatically get the same meme
copied into a recipient
along with other means it has to compete
for the recipient's attention
and acceptance with all sorts of
behaviors by other people
and with the recipient's own ideas all
that is in addition to the analog of the
type of selection that genes face
each meme competing with rival versions
of itself across the population
perhaps by containing the knowledge for
some useful function
memes are subject to all sorts of random
and intentional
variation in addition to that selection
and so they evolve
so to this extent the same logic holds
as for genes memes are
selfish they do not necessarily evolve
to benefit their holders
or their society or again even
themselves except in the sense of
replicating better than other memes
though now most other memes are their
rivals not just variants of themselves
the successful meme variant is the one
that changes the behaviour of its
holders in such a way
as to make itself best at displacing
other memes from the population
this variant may well benefit its
holders or their culture
or the species as a whole but if it
harms them or destroys them it will
spread anyway
memes that harm society are a familiar
phenomenon you need only consider the
harm done by adherents of political
views or religions that you especially
abort
societies have been destroyed because
some of the memes that were best at
spreading through the population
were bad for a society i should discuss
one example in chapter 17
and countless individuals have been
harmed or killed by adopting memes that
were bad for them
such as irrational political ideologies
or dangerous fads
fortunately in the case of memes that is
not the whole story to understand the
rest of the story
we have to consider the basic strategies
by which memes cause themselves to be
faithfully replicated
okay pausing there just my brief
reflection on this
this is reminiscent in some sense to
what in biology is called the
naturalistic fallacy which i've talked
about before
the naturalistic fallacy is the idea
that if something is natural
then therefore it's good think of new
age
types or people who believe in only
living a paleo diet
think of people who regard chemicals as
altogether bad and
only things which uh appear biologically
natural
are good but of course all that style of
thinking is refuted by
funnel web spider venom or snake venom
it's a thing that occurs naturally but
it's certainly not good for you
and you want the artificial anti-venom
if it can be got if you happen to get
bitten by one of these things
lots of natural things like rape or
eating your children happen to exist out
there in nature among
lower animal forms but of course just
because it's natural
doesn't make it good so when it comes to
humans
what is natural for us is typically what
is
unnatural for everything else and often
what is good what is unnatural
is what is quite good creating knowledge
is natural for us creating technology is
natural for us
sometimes the technologies have side
effects which themselves cause certain
problems
that's all a natural part of being human
so in a way the distinction between the
natural and the artificial for
us is nonsensical everything we do
is a natural outworking of our creative
capacity which we happen to have
but if you're going to say that
everything we do is unnatural
and therefore bad in some way then
you're caught in this bind of assuming
that we should be
replicating or repeating or trying to
emulate what's going on
out there in nature but you really don't
want to emulate the behavior of i don't
know
a lion you know lions typically eat the
children of their competitors so it's
it's not an ideal society to emulate
not everything that is natural is good
we already know this this is
straightforward
related to this kind of naturalistic
fallacy which i think
many rational clear thinking people
typically reject this idea of natural as
good
is the idea that anything that in that
has evolved
in biology is therefore useful or
beneficial or even works
to some extent this idea that biological
structures exist
only if they work well sometimes but not
always
the only thing that's being replicated
the only thing that works is the gene
the structure that actually arises
including the whole organism itself
isn't necessarily benefited
by the evolutionary process that has led
to it
let's sharpen it to sharpen this up a
bit if you have appendicitis
someone telling you that the the
existence of the gene that causes your
eventual appendicitis that could be a
genetic thing
it's small comfort to think that well
some in some way that was natural
in some way it has worked that's why
it's there in your body well it's not
working for you
it's also not working for you if you
happen to have genes as most human
beings do
for the eventual decay of the discs
between the vertebrate and their spine
people get bad backs as they get older
in fact something as simple as the genes
that eventually lead to death
the genes that eventually lead to
disease of any kind
i don't know too much about sharks but i
have read that sharks apparently don't
suffer from cancer
so they have good genes that we lack our
genes
apparently allow for the possibility of
cancer if we had different genes
then perhaps we wouldn't perhaps we
wouldn't have disease of any kind if our
genes were slightly different perhaps we
would live forever
if our genes were of a certain kind that
solution must be out there in abstract
biological space
people living longer people living for
instead of 80 years 160 years perhaps a
thousand years
those genes must be out there somewhere
so the genes that we do have
aren't necessarily of great benefit to
us
necessarily they can be of some benefit
they can kind of work
they aren't perfect and there would be
better variants out there
and all of these problems that are there
within our genes all these
non-ideal structures and features of our
lives that we happen to inherit from our
genes
we will change gradually with our ideas
as we come up with better ways of
genetically engineering ourselves of
curing disease of trying to fix cancer
and so on and so forth
of trying to combat age well
that will be memes that will be causing
the big changes in us
not the genes so genes don't exist
because they're necessarily beneficial
to the organisms
which they give rise to same two for
memes
just because a meme happens to have
survived
over and again does not necessarily mean
that it's good for that organism or as
david says the society in which it finds
itself being replicated
genes do not have our best interests at
heart memes do not necessarily have our
best interests at heart
so just because a meme is popular
does not mean that it's good in fact
sometimes the opposite
many memes are very very harmful they
are after all this david has said
selfish they're all about themselves to
the extent they do
survive some do so at our expense
not all of them but this is where
rational analysis comes in
the meme that says killing yourself and
other innocent people
in order to secure a place in eternal
paradise
is one that does attract people and new
adherence every single year hopefully
less and less
every single year as we learn more and
as
rational dynamic societies spread
throughout the world
nevertheless this idea of doing harm to
yourself and harm to other people
in order to appease a nasty god
in the eternal paradise is something
that has persisted over time
it's a meme that gets itself replicated
and it resists
correction often because it's conjoined
with other memes that tell you that
thinking that that particular meme is
false
is a reason for you not getting into
paradise or a reason that you are
deficient in some way so this is an
anti-rational kind of meme
it's a meme that causes itself not to be
criticized
it resists criticism it resists error
correction but
and so therefore it gets replicated in
its existing form well not therefore
it exists in its existing form and it is
attractive for some reason to the
society or to the to the
adherence of the mean okay back to the
book
and david has just finished the section
there that i read by saying
i'll repeat it to understand the rest of
the story we have to consider the basic
strategies
by which memes cause themselves to be
faithfully replicated
and the next section is subtitled static
societies
and he writes as i have explained a
human brain
quite unlike a genome is itself an arena
of intense variation selection
and competition most ideas within a
brain are created by it
for the very purpose of trying them out
in imagination
criticizing them and varying them until
they meet the person's preferences
in other words mean replication itself
involves evolution within individual
brains
in some cases there can be thousands of
cycles of variation in selection before
any of the variants has ever enacted
then even after a meme has been copied
into a new holder
it has not yet completed its life cycle
it still has to survive
a further selection process namely the
holder's choice of whether to enact it
or not
pause there just um my reflection again
remember uh
in the last episode if you heard that
there were four kinds of
ideas not all of which are memes in fact
the first three kinds are not memes
so the four kinds are like this um the
first is
an idea you simply have and it causes no
behavior in you whatsoever i might be
sitting here and thinking i wouldn't
mind getting a cup of tea
but if i don't act on it well it hasn't
caused any behavior and i've just
thought about it and maybe i've
criticized it and i've thought to myself
no i've already had two cups of tea a
day i don't want another one okay that's
an idea of the first type
idea the second type is i wouldn't mind
having a cup of tea and actually get up
go over to the kettle in the teapot and
go through the process of making the tea
and then drinking the tea
but if there's no one else here in my
house and no one ever sees me
having that cup of tea there's no
possibility that anyone could ever copy
it
and so although it's an idea it's an
idea that's caused a behavior in me
there's no possibility of it being
replicated so that's the second time
so an idea of the third type would be
everything i just did then in the second
type
have the idea of a cup of tea actually
going through the process of making the
cup of tea and someone actually sees me
having the cup of tea and drinking the
cup of tea
but if they decide not to copy that well
it's not a meme at all
okay it's just an idea that's caused
behavior that they happen to have
observed
now in the fourth type this is where we
have the idea and it causes a behavior
in me and i go and have
my cup of tea and i drink it here out of
my university of oxford cup
and i put it onto a podcast like this
and people who are watching see it
and then for whatever reason lots of
people go out and buy university of
oxford cups and decide to start
i don't know drinking cups of tea on
video that would be a meme
that is where we've got an idea that has
caused behavior that's being replicated
now that's a silly idea
most other memes are far more useful and
they tend to get replicated because
they're solving some kind of problem or
they're
achieving other some other kind of aim
although there are memes out there that
are
just as silly or trivial as that and
tend to get
replicated they might not have a long
lifespan though but whatever the case
this is how the broad category of things
that we call ideas
can be distinguished from memes the
ideas that tend to get replicated
and that tend to persist over time
especially across many generations
not always maybe they'll only exist for
some days or weeks or years we know this
definitely on the internet that there
are certain memes that seem to arise and
then
decline again very quickly but
broadly speaking memes are things that
do persist
over many generations and the longest
lived memes tend to cause
cultural changes as well now we might
consider um i have a
couple of volumes up here of feynman's
lectures on physics well
they came from a certain history of
memes the history of memes that began
with
galileo and kepler and then newton
who came up with newtonian classical
physics
and then and those memes were passed on
through many generations
due to people delivering lectures
convening classes
writing books about them eventually
leading to
feynman himself delivering lectures
which were published in a book
which included aspects of newtonian
physics so that meme has persisted over
time
and has been refined even and its rate
of propagation has increased throughout
the world
and in fact some of the refinements
to those original memes tend to improve
them
and cause them to be replicated in even
better ways or to
be or to persist even more robustly or
to be promoted throughout the world even
more than what they otherwise would have
been
feynman himself was very very good at
this let's take for example
something like specific heat capacity
specific heat capacity is
a part of physics it describes
well specific heat capacity is defined
as
the amount of energy required to raise
the temperature
of one unit mass of a substance a unit
mass is usually regarded in physic is a
kilogram
by one kelvin or one degrees celsius so
just to say that again specific heat
capacity the amount of energy it takes
to raise a substance
of one kilogram by one degree celsius
now there's all sorts of ways to try and
understand and explain this feynman had
his own way of explaining and
understanding this and
he taught his students that it's
analogous
to wetness that you could
describe something that is able to
absorb water
as having a certain degree of wetness
and
it can absorb a certain amount of water
before it becomes entirely saturated
some things can hold a lot of water
let's say a big bath towel
and some things cannot hold much water
at all let's say
a tissue what's this got to do with
specific heat capacity
well people have an idea in their mind
they already have common sense
understanding that
the tissue cannot hold much water before
it becomes saturated
but the bath towel can hold quite a bit
of water before it becomes completely
saturated
now if we extend this analogy to
specific heat capacity
the idea here is that some substances
like iron cannot hold much heat
before the temperature increases so if
you take a an iron pot a stainless steel
pot
and stick it on the stove then after a
few seconds the temperature will rise
very quickly if
in order to raise one kilogram of iron
by one degree celsius
it takes very little energy in
comparison to something like water
if you fill that pot with water what you
will notice is it takes a lot of energy
a lot of time in order to cause the
temperature of that water to
increase and the reason is specific heat
capacity there is this quality
of substances that determines how much
energy
is absorbed to cause the temperature to
rise
and what's this got to do with memes
well feynman's way of explaining this
has been regarded by some people
involved in physics education as being a
particularly useful
analogy and so it helps the meme to
spread because it makes it easier for
some people to learn this concept to
understand this concept of specific heat
capacity
so feynman not only promoted the meme of
specific heat capacity the idea that got
replicated over time
but found ways of causing it to be
replicated with ever
increasing fidelity or certainly to
cause it to
be spread more widely than it might
otherwise would have been after all if
you trying to teach someone and not
using analogies
and not trying to explain things in
terms they might already understand
then they may not very well understand
it and they won't therefore
have behaviors like being able to
explain it to someone else later on
causing the mean to otherwise be
replicated so this is what i mean about
there are memes themselves like the meme
of
trying to analogize something or trying
to use a metaphor in order to explain
something
that themselves can cause other means
like specific heat capacity
to be replicated better okay so let's go
back to the book and david writes
some of the criteria that a mind uses to
make such choices
are themselves memes some are ideas that
it has created for itself
by altering memes or otherwise and which
will never exist in any other mind
such ideas are potentially highly
variable between different people
yet they can decisively affect whether
any given meme does or does not survive
a given person since a person can enact
and transmit a meme
soon after receiving it a meme
generation can be much shorter than a
human generation
and many cycles of variation and
selection can take place inside the
minds concerned
even during one meme generation also
memes can be passed to people other than
the holder's biological descendants
those factors make meme evolution
enormously faster than gene evolution
which
partly explains how memes can contain so
much knowledge
hence the frequently cited metaphor of
the history of life on earth
in which human civilization occupies
only the final
second of the day during which life has
so far existed
is misleading in reality a substantial
proportion of
all evolution on our planet to date has
occurred in human brains
and it has barely begun the whole of
biological evolution was but a preface
to the main story of evolution
the evolution of means now that
bears repeating you know you see this in
in biology textbooks you see this in
geology textbooks if you regard the
beginning of life on earth as being
january the first
you know of a particular year then by
the time you get to december 31st of
that same year
human beings only appear in the final
second
if you were to spread out evolution that
long or geological time anyway
that long so it appears as if um we
haven't been that profound we're not
very profound compared to
all other life on earth but that's a
strange
measure of profundity of the profundity
of evolution in the universe
because really although there has been a
vast amount of evolution biologically
speaking
if we consider all forms of evolution
all forms of change that have ever
happened
then the evolution of ideas that has
happened over time
far outstrips what goes on in biology
and will continue to
the rate of change of ideas in human
civilization
is far far greater and far faster than
anything that's going on in the
biological realm
fast though that may be it is completely
outstripped so again as david says
in reality a substantial proportion of
all evolution on our planet to date
has occurred in human brains and it has
barely begun
the whole of biological evolution was
but a preface
to the main story of evolution the
evolution of
memes now if anyone out there listen
ever listens to the podcaster
joe rogan joe speaks in
terms like this now and again when he's
in particular moods
he will talk about precisely that
actually how
it seems as though his understanding
of human beings is that we are giving
birth to something
that he's not sure of what it is but
it's something technological
something beyond biology it's something
post-governed by
natural evolutionary laws or natural
biological
evolutionary laws we're moving beyond
that and here's his
common sense understanding of that that
he's come to is quite right and in line
with this idea
that biological evolution is merely a
preface to whatever is coming next
this evolution of ideas which might
allow us
to fly free completely of our biology
at the moment we're not there at the
moment we are very much subject to the
bio
to biology but if one day we can have
bodies that are more robust
and not made out of this meat we don't
meat
we're not packets of meat but our brains
are able to be put into something
far more resilient something like
silicon
then evolution will not have a bearing
on us
we won't have brains that are determined
by genes we'll have brains instead
that run minds that are completely
independent of our bodies
and therefore will not be subject to the
biological necessities that we have like
eating and drinking and so on and so
forth et cetera
it's just too much to think about yeah
but we have to
i know we do have to and one of the
things that's always been
amusing to me is that we seem to have
this
insatiable desire to improve things yeah
and i've always wondered why
like but but is that maybe because this
is what human beings are here for
yeah it's what we do yeah it's who we
are right yeah but this is a product
it's just
us being intelligent trying to survive
against nature and
predators and weather and all the all
the different issues that we came up
that we evolved growing up and dealing
with
and then now we just want things to be
better we just want things to be more
convenient
faster but more data and whatever the
case is
this process of meme replication is not
controlled by the genes now it
they're analogous in in in the sense
that
both of them evolve but genes evolve
over time and
memes evolve over time but the memes
are not in the genes and this is where
evolutionary psychology gets things so
seriously wrong
at times to think that all of our memes
our ideas are in some way
if not determined by then certainly
shaped by
biological determinism that there's
genes that cause us to have certain
thoughts
now that might be true but that would be
the tiniest fraction of thoughts we ever
have
are ones in which there's some
biological antecedent in which in which
you could trace some sort of
idea to a gene that would be a rare
exception to the rule
the evolution of memes also unlike genes
evolution of memes can be
a highly intelligently designed
process because not always of course
but we are intelligent and so we can
design certain ideas
if we have an idea for a certain kind of
architecture
then that's most certainly intelligently
designed and that meme can spread
throughout the world and cause certain
styles of buildings to be
built all over the world and so that's a
certain kind of meme that can spread it
can be replicated
and it's intelligently designed now not
it's not always the case
that memes are intelligently designed
some are not
we would presume that memes that
actively
tend to destroy the lives of human
beings haven't been intelligently
designed
they have arisen for non-intelligent
reasons
and they persist over time and they're
anti-rational in many many ways
but broadly speaking many of the memes
that we're interested in
are these ones that um people
subject to criticism that they refine
over time uh and that the propagate
because someone wants them to propagate
but not all not all meme evolution is
blind in that sense
some is much is not uh and that's
another
key difference with gene evolution okay
so i'm going to skip a little here
david talks about how meme replication
is less reliable than gene replication
clearly because people have these
creative minds and so they're constantly
changing their ideas and so that can
cause memes to
themselves be criticized destroyed
and therefore not be replicated at all
and and he mentions the term
intentional variation with respect to
memes this
this intelligent designing that i was
taught speaking of
um i guess my terms a little bit more
loaded than what
david's is intentional variation
unlike random variation which goes on
with the genes so the intentional
variation of a meme
can itself cause it to be criticized or
varied in such a way
that it's not going to be replicated
it's not going to be passed on to the
next generation or to to another person
in fact it might be criticized in such a
way as it causes
no further behavior even if it's been
causing behavior
prior to that people want to people want
to improve their ideas and so
therefore some of the ideas that might
have been causing behavior for many many
generations might
cease to cause any further behavior
think of all the ridiculous medical
practices that used to go on
bloodletting for example you were sick
and so the
doctor would cut you and release some of
your blood because it had the bad stuff
in you
well that was certainly a meme that went
around for a long time
eventually someone figured out that was
ridiculous and so it ceased to be
propagated
and so uh this is the reason why we can
have intentional variation of means
we can have intent this intentional
variation of memes
and therefore um the replication isn't
reliable in the sense that you don't get
this
persistence necessarily and it's not
just for
uh reasons of fitness we can
deliberately
stop the replication of names we can
deliberately stop the replication of
certain genes in ourselves as well but
out there in biology of course the genes
will get replicated as long as they're
fit that's all that
is needed and david goes through a
little bit about what
dynamic societies are which i'll talk
about in the next episode because i
really want to spend most of time here
talking about static societies
but basically the concept here is that
that only post-enlightenment societies
are dynamic ones
and by dynamic dynamic we mean
stable under change over time
that's that's one measure making rapid
progress
rapid meaning progress that is
noticeable
on the time scale of individual human
lives and even today we'd want
something even more rapid than that
within a year we noticed a certain
amount of progress
uh new new smartphones come out every
single year
if a year went by where a new kind of
car
did not come out then we'd think it a
bit strange or if a new piece of
software didn't come out
the rate of progress is increasing the
rate of change is increasing
so we notice that year on year this is
the feature of our dynamic society
but then what is the what are the
features of a static society well let's
turn to the book and david writes
for a society to be static all its means
must be unchanging
or changing too slowly to be noticed
from the perspective of our rapidly
changing society
such a state of affairs is hard to even
imagine for instance
consider an isolated primitive society
that has whatever reason
remained almost unchanged for many
generations
why quite possibly no one in the society
wants it to change because they can
conceive of no other way of life
nevertheless its members are not immune
from pain hunger
grief fear or other forms of physical
and mental suffering
they try to think of ideas to alleviate
some of that suffering
some of those ideas are original and
occasionally one of them would actually
help
it need only be a small tentative
improvement a way of hunting or growing
food with slight less effort or of
making slightly better tools a better
way of recording debts or laws
a subtle change in the relationship
between husband and wife or between
parent and child
a slightly different attitude towards a
society's rulers or gods
what will happen next the person with
the idea
may well want to tell other people those
who believe the idea
will see that it could make life a
little less nasty brutish and short
they will tell their families and
friends and they theirs
this idea will be competing in people's
minds with other ideas about how to make
life better
most of them presumably false but
suppose for the sake of argument that
this particular true idea
happens to be believed and spreads
through the society
then the society will have been changed
it may not have changed very much
but this was merely the change caused by
a single person thinking of a single
idea
so multiply all that by the number of
thinking minds in the society
and buy the lifetime's worth of thought
in each of them and let this continue
for only a few generations and the
result is
an exponentially increasing
revolutionary force
transforming every aspect of society end
quote
and pause there now this mirrors doesn't
it all the way back
to chapter one of the beginning of
infinity
people want to be less hungry suffer
less they want to improve their lives
they want to be
less diseased they want to grow more
food etc they have
problems and what do they want to do
well they want to
explain the world around them so the
quest
for good explanations is what causes the
society to change
over time what normally preoccupied them
also
involved yearning to know they wished
they
knew how to prevent their food supply
from sometimes failing
and how they could rest when they were
tired without uh
risking starvation be
warmer cooler safer
in less pain i bet those prehistoric
cave artists
would have loved to know how to draw
better
because the quest for good explanations
is a
problem-solving enterprise and where we
find solutions
to the problems that we have then those
solutions if they're effective
can become memes that transmit
themselves throughout society and a
special case
of memes would be good explanations
hard to vary explanations and so when
you've got a
hard to vary explanation a good
explanation of
a particularly pressing problem that
society has
then you have a beginning of infinity
because then you have
the capacity to incrementally
over time improve your ideas and
continue to solve that particular
problem and related problems and more
interesting problems as well
back to the book david writes but
in a static society that beginning of
infinity never happens
despite the fact that i have assumed
nothing other
than that people try to improve their
lives and that they cannot transmit
their ideas perfectly
and that information subject to
variation and selection evolves
i have entirely failed to imagine a
static society in this story
pause my reflection so that's
interesting isn't it so he tried to
imagine
what a static society was
by assuming that nothing more
than that people wanted to improve their
lives and
um and this has caused him to actually
imagine a dynamic society
a society which causes problems to be
solved at the time
he's imagined a dynamic society and so
he
goes on to write david goes on to write
quote for a society to be static
something else must be happening as well
one thing my story did not take into
account is that static societies have
customs and laws taboos
that prevent their memes from changing
they enforce the enactment of existing
memes
forbid the enactment of variance and
suppress criticism of the status quo
however that alone could not suppress
change
first no enactment of a meme is
completely identical
to that of the previous generation it is
infeasible to specify every aspect of
acceptable behavior with perfect
precision
second it is impossible to tell in
advance which small deviations from
traditional behavior
would initiate further changes third
once a variant idea
has begun to spread to even one more
person which means that people are
preferring it
preventing it from being transmitted
further is extremely difficult
therefore no society could remain static
solely by suppressing new ideas
once they have been created that is why
the enforcement of the status quo is
only ever a secondary method of
preventing change
a mopping up operation the primary
method is always and only can be
to disable the source of new ideas
namely human creativity
let's pause there let's just read that
again because i think this is um
so profound and poorly understood
out there especially among people who
are
otherwise very interested in this
question about why
do some societies make progress slower
than others
is it that these fast dynamic wealthy
societies
are oppressing these other societies
and some people will come with the
answer and say no it's not our fault
it's not the fault of the west the
enlightenment societies that
some other societies aren't quite as
wealthy the problem is that in those
societies there's a form of
tyranny or enforcement of the status quo
well that's part of the answer but as
david says there and let's just reread
it
he says quote the enforcement of the
status quo
is only ever a secondary method of
preventing change
a mopping up operation the primary
method
is always and can only be to disable the
source of new ideas
namely human creativity so static
societies always
have traditions of bringing up children
in ways that
disable their creativity and critical
faculties
that ensures that most of the new ideas
that would have been capable of changing
the society
i never thought of in the first place
pausing there again
okay so it's worse than merely having
a government let's say which is
oppressive and tyrannical
something else is going on at a much
deeper level
where the culture is such that children
and
others never have the idea in the first
place to improve the society
because there are other ideas in their
mind memes
causing them to be afraid fearful or
simply unable
to have new ideas because as soon as the
genesis of the idea begins to make
itself known to the thinker
these means clamp down on that
prevent it from reaching fruition
they undermine disable human creativity
which is a remarkable thing and so
let's read uh what i think is a
discovery by david deutch
with respect to meme theory i haven't
read it
read it anywhere else i've read a few
books on meme theory but
um this is the first time i've read uh
this solution to that problem of why
people might not be able to be in a
position
necessarily to criticize the ideas that
cause their society to be static and not
make progress
and solve problems in the way that other
societies might be better at
david writes how is this done the
details are variable not relevant here
but the sort of thing that happens
is that people are growing up in such a
society
acquire a set of values for judging
themselves
and everyone else which amounts to
ridding themselves
of distinctive attributes and seeking
only conformity with the society's
constitutive means they not only enact
those memes they see themselves as
existing only in order to enact them
so not only do such societies enforce
qualities such as obedience
piety and devotion to duty their members
sense of their own selves is invested in
the same standards
people know no others so they feel pride
and shame
and form all their aspirations and
opinions
by the criterion of how thoroughly they
subordinate themselves
to the society's means okay so just
pausing there and i'm
reflecting on that here's the idea
that there are certain kinds of memes
which disable the ability of their
holders of thinking
anything new because their creativity
instead
is being used to ever
more faithfully enact the status quo
okay and then david writes quote how do
memes
know how to achieve all such complex
reproducible effects
on the ideas and behavior of human
beings they do not of course know
they are not sentient beings they merely
contain that knowledge implicitly
how did they come by that knowledge it
evolved
the memes exist at any instant in many
different variant forms
and those are subject to selection in
favor of faithful
replication for every long-lived meme of
a static society
millions of variants will have fallen by
the wayside because they lacked that
tiny extra piece of information
that extra degree of ruthless efficiency
in preventing rivals
from being thought of or acted upon that
slight advantage in psychological
leverage
or whatever it took to make it spread
through the population
better than it travels and once it was
prevalent
to get it copied and enacted with just
that extra degree of fidelity
if ever a variant happened to be a
little better at inducing behavior with
those self-replicating properties
it soon became prevalent as soon as it
did
there were again many variants of that
variant which were again subject to the
same evolutionary pressure
thus successive versions of the meme
accumulated knowledge that enabled them
to ever more reliably
inflict their characteristic style of
damage on their human victims
like jeans they may also confer benefits
though even then
they are unlikely to do so optimally
just as genes for the eye implicitly
know the laws of optics so the
long-lived memes of a static society
implicitly possess
knowledge of the human condition and use
it mercilessly
to evade the defenses and exploit the
weaknesses of the human minds
that they enslave okay then skipping a
substantial bit here where david talks
about
time and he says that static societies
are not perfectly
unchanging but certainly
primitive societies would have been
static by
our any measure that we would think of
as being static over at the course of
anyone's lifetime
nothing would have been improved much
your life would have been the same as
your parents lives would have been some
of your grandparents lives and so on
back hundreds or thousands of
generations
david also then mentions the fact that
meme evolution
tends to make memes static
but not necessarily whole society's
static
memes he says do not evolve to benefit
the group just like
jeans as we were saying the genes that
not only don't benefit necessarily
to to benefit the group
genes don't even exist to benefit the
individuals in which they exist as well
they might but the gene is there to try
and get itself replicated
and that could be via various means
which might not include
necessarily the survival of that
particular individual let alone that
particular group
okay and then i'll pick it up where
david says
quote a static society forms when there
is no escape from this effect
all significant behavior or
relationships between people
and all thoughts are subordinated to
causing faithful replication of the
memes
in all areas controlled by the memes no
critical faculties are exercised
no innovation is tolerated and almost
none is attempted
this destruction of human minds makes
static societies almost
unimaginable from our perspective
countless human beings
hoping throughout lifetimes and for
generations for their suffering to be
relieved
not only fail to make progress in
realizing any such hope
they largely fail even to try to make
any
or even to think about trying if they do
see an opportunity
they reject it the spirit of creativity
with which we are born is systematically
extinguished in them
before it can ever create anything new
a static society involves in a sense
consists of
a relentless struggle to prevent
knowledge from growing but there is more
to it than that
for there is no reason to expect that a
rapidly spreading idea
if one did happen to arise in a static
society would be true
or useful that is another aspect missing
from my story of the static society
above that i
that david imagined i assumed
that the change would be for the better
it might not have been
especially as the lack of critical
sophistication in a static society
would leave people vulnerable to false
and harmful ideas
from which their taboos did not predict
them
and then david mentions the example
which i won't read about the black death
and all the bad ideas that people
used to use in order to try and cure
disease like the black death you're
killing jews killing witches
flagellating yourself all these silly
things that of course
didn't work and in fact caused far more
harm than good
and then he goes on to write thus
ironically there is much
truth in the typical static society fear
that
any change is much more likely to do
harm than good
okay so pausing there just my reflection
yeah any change is more likely to do
harm than good
um when we talk about progress we're not
just talking about
change for change's sake after all most
change that could happen could be
random and a random change should not be
expected to improve things
quite the opposite a lot of institutions
that exist a lot of ideas that we have
have evolved over time
and weathered the criticisms that have
been brought to bear against it
and have survived and so we end up with
robust ideas good ideas
good institutions any change to that
any random change is going to be for the
worse what we need
is very carefully calibrated change that
itself is subject to criticism which can
cause change in a particular direction
that we call progress so back to the
book and david writes
static societies survive by effectively
eliminating the type of evolution that
is unique to memes
namely creative variation intended to
meet the holders individual preferences
in the absence of that meme evolution
resembles gene evolution more closely
and some of the grim conclusions of the
naive analogies between them
apply after all static societies
do tend to settle issues by violence and
they do tend to sacrifice the welfare of
individuals for the good of
that is to say for the prevention of
changes in society
i mentioned that people who rely on such
analogies end up either advocating a
static society
or condoning violence and oppression we
now see that those two responses are
essentially the same
oppression is what it takes to keep a
society static
oppression of a given kind will not last
long until the society is static
since the sustained exponential growth
of knowledge has unmistakable effects
we can deduce without historical
research that every society on earth
before the current western civilization
has either been static
or has been destroyed within a few
generations
the golden ages of athens and florence
are examples that latter
but there may have been others this
directly contradicts the widely held
belief that individuals in primitive
societies
were happy in a way that has not been
possible since
they were unconstrained by social
convention and other imperatives of
civilization
and hence were able to achieve
self-expression and fulfillment of their
needs and desires
but primitive societies including tribes
of hunter-gatherers
must all have been static societies
because if ever one ceased to be
static it would soon cease to be
primitive or else destroy itself by
losing its distinctive knowledge
in the latter case the growth of
knowledge would still be inhibited by
the raw violence which would be
immediately
which would immediately replace the
static society's institution for once
violence is mediating changes they will
typically not be for the better
since static societies cannot exist
without effectively extinguishing the
growth of knowledge
they cannot allow their members much
opportunity to pursue happiness
ironically creating knowledge itself is
itself a natural human need and desire
and static societies however primitive
unnaturally
suppress it i'll say that again because
i think i misspoke a little but it's
it's worth repeating creating knowledge
is itself a natural human need and
desire
creating knowledge is itself a natural
human need and desire
so as i was saying right at the
beginning of this
so much of what is regarded as unnatural
artificial
and therefore bad is actually what we do
naturally
creating knowledge this whole natural
artificial natural
unnatural distinction is a chimera of
sorts it's a
silly way of trying to divide up any
aspect of reality
unless you're a biologist i suppose
moving on
david writes from the point of view of
every individual in such a society its
creativity
suppressing mechanisms are
catastrophically harmful
every static society must leave its
members chronically booked in their
attempts to achieve anything positive
for themselves as people
or indeed anything at all other than
their meme
mandated behaviors it can perpetuate
itself
only by suppressing its members
self-expression and breaking their
spirits
and its memes are exquisitely adapted to
doing this
and that's where we'll end the next
section is about dynamic societies
so just to summarize all of this the
reason
a static society exists
and persists over time despite having
creative people within it
is that the creativity has been disabled
and or being used
to ever more faithfully enact the status
quo
and it does that because all the other
kinds of creativity have been
switched off disabled especially in
young people
they're threatened with violence and
violence is used
they're told that they're going to an
eternal hell
of suffering if they do not enact the
rituals in the same way
that has always been done if they seek
to improve
something then that would be regarded as
unholy or unnatural
and so in this way the society remains
the same
over time it remains static even if the
people would like
things to improve they have no means by
which to improve
because the ideas are switched off and
it's not to say that our society is
perfectly dynamic
and that we lack these kind of
irrational means we're going to learn
about that
in the very next part that we talk about
about dynamic societies
and then after that the real distinction
the rational versus
anti-rational memes um but that's for
next time
until then see you as always thank you
to everyone who's supporting me
i have means and ways by which you can
support my ongoing efforts with
this via patreon just look up topcast
patreon or brehl patreon
you can also paypal me which um a couple
of people have and thank you very much
to those people
once more i'm able to bring these out
and buy little
gadgets like this to hopefully improve
the quality somewhat
um with people's contributions so thank
you very much for that
um until next time bye